Nut user's guide
Jonathan Rees 19 August 1997

For method description, please see
    Yanai, R.D.  1994.  
    A steady-state model of nutrient uptake accounting for newly-grown roots.
    Soil. Sci. Soc. Am. J. 58:1562-1571.
    doi:10.2136/sssaj1994.03615995005800050041x
    http://hydrology1.nmsu.edu/nm-soil-water-model/Steady-state_model.pdf
Kindly reference this article when reporting on uses of this software.

The program reads a single file, the "control file," and writes a
single file, the "results file".  The program prompts for the names of
these files.  If a file exists with the name that was specified for
the results file, then the program asks you whether you would like to
replace it.  If you say no (actually, if you don't say "y" or "yes"),
you can enter a different file name.


The control file file has the following form:
  1. Comment lines
     One blank line
  2. Control switches lines
     One blank line
  3. Input / results column designation
  4. Input record lines
  5. End of file


1. Comment lines
   Initial nonblank lines are copied verbatim to the output file.

2. Control switches lines
   A sequence of lines, with each line controlling the disposition of
   one of the simulation variables.
   Each line has the form
        <varname>  <units>  <status>  <parameter>
   where these four fields are tab-separated.  The parameter
   is optional if <status> is "input".
   See below for a list of <varname>s.

   Possible values for <status> field: (default if not specified is
   "calculated")
     Fixed         The value is constant, and is specified in the
		     parameter field.
     Input         A new value is obtained at each time step from an
		     input record.
     Calculated    The value is calculated or updated in a manner
		     idiosyncratic to the variable.  The parameter
		     field may supply an initial value.  See below.
     Linear        Variable grows linearly with time (see below).
		     Parameter is initial value.
     Exponential   Variable grows exponentially (see below).
		     Parameter is initial value.

State variables:
  name     units      (*)
  ----     -----      ---
  alpha    cm/s       FIC? Root absorbing power
  b        1          F C  Soil buffer capacity (cm3/cm3)
  C0       mol/cm3      C  Concentration at root surface
  Cav      mol/cm3    FIC  Average nutrient concentration
  De       cm2/s      FIC  Effective diffusion coefficient
  Dl	   1 ??	      F	   Diffusion coefficient of ion in water
  dt       s          FI   Duration of a timestep
  f        1            C  Fugacity (for computing v0) (NYI)
  f_slope  1/s        F    Change in f (NYI)
  growth   1/s        F    Growth rate (exponential; cm/cm/s)
  growth   cm/s       F    Growth rate (linear; cm/s)
  iter	   1	        C  Iteration number  [flush this?]
  Kd       cm3/g      FI   slope of adsorption isotherm
  Km       mol/cm3    FI   Solution concentration at which net influx
  L        cm         FILE Root length
  Lv	   1/cm2      FI   Root length per unit volume
  r0       cm         FI?  Root radius
  rho	   g/cm3      FI   Soil bulk density
  rx       cm         FIC  Average radial distance to the next root's 
                           zone of influence
  source   mol/cm3/s  FI   Nutrient supply/depletion (Cav pump)
  steps    1          F C  Number of timesteps to run
  t        s            C  Time
  theta    1          FI   Water content (cm3/cm3)
  U        mol          C  Uptake (this is the main output of the model)
  Unew     mol        FI   Uptake of new roots
  v0       cm/s       FI   Inward radial velocity of water at root surf
  Vmax     mol/cm2/s  FI   Maximum influx at high concentration is 1/2 Vmax
  w0       cm3/s      FI   Rate of water uptake

The column marked (*) lists permissible settings of the status field:
F = fixed, I = input, C = calculated, L = linear, E = exponential.

The units field should agree in dimensionality with the units given
above.  In most cases, the unit given above is the only unit
supported, but a few additional units are supported:

    day
    1/day
    m

Other unit conversions will be added in the future.

CALCULATION -- Some variables can get their values by applying
formulas to some of the other variables.  -- This documentation is
incomplete!  It should, but doesn't, give the particular formulas that
are used.  For now consult the source code (Nut.f), Ruth's paper, me,
or Ruth.  I will fill in this gap when I get an opportunity.  -Jonathan


3. Input / results column designations

This single line should be a list of tab-separated variable names.
The results file will tabulate values of those variables, and no
others.  The list must include all of the input variables; the order
in which the input variables occur in this list is the order in which
they will be read from the input records.  Note that this means that
the results file is a superset of the input records, in a "fill in the
blanks" manner.

4. Input records

If N of the variables in the switches list have status "input", then
the simulation program will expect to see that many numbers on each
input record.  Tabs and spaces in between successive numbers are
ignored.
